Okay, so you didn't— They didn't get to—
Well, we were delayed at Camp Sutton for several
months after we pulled out of Camp Shelby. We were
delayed at Camp Sutton for several months, and
then we got from there, we were the first regiment
to go into the famous embarkation camp near
Rutgers. That's the name for the guy that wrote the
poem.
I think that I shall never see
I shall never write a poem as noble as a tree or
whatever it is. You know that poem? Is that Forever
England, that one? No, that's this American poet
that wrote Trees.
I think that I shall never see a poem prettier than a
tree, a tree that blah blah blah blah blah.
We went up to camp.
It's just outside of Rutgers, New Jersey, on the
north side. And that was the staging area where you
waited for the ships to come. Now the whole
movement was delayed by the shortage of shipping.
And another thing that delayed it is that the great
white father, Roosevelt, had promised his friend
Winston Churchill that America would have an
expeditionary force coming to the British Isles
without delay. So you went to Britain then? And
yeah without delay and we will we'll Whip Hitler
first, then we'll gang up and get rid of the other
war. Well, what the great white father forgot was
that the Japs weren't weak. When they spread out
down there and wiped out the Asiatic fleet, which
was a very weak sister, the old admiral that
commanded it
was had the biggest job to cry over after his fleet
was wiped out than anybody in the service. But when
he was wiped out and the Japs had opened their war
against anybody that had a colony that they
wanted, all the way from Burma to the best holdings
of the Dutch and the East Indies included. They
took the whole thing and moved in with massive
forces and followed up on the victory at Pearl
Harbor. They followed it up and exploited it to the
nth degree. and that gave
the president a second thought with his admirals
and his generals breathing pretty hard down his
neck, including his choice general.
I mentioned him a moment ago. Marshal. Marshal. So
you probably, you didn't get to England until
1943. No, I got to England shortly after Labor Day.
Of 42. Of 42. And you trained there then for the next
18 months waiting to go, waiting to invade in
D-Day. We went at first to our first village. We
were in North Ireland.
and we moved in the village that had been occupied
by the British. Well the British had an army that
was disarmed when they left their guns and
material on the beaches of Holland following the
retreat
from the... after the collapse of France. They had
no place to go and they left that there. Well, that
army that was pushed out of there was re-militated
in North Ireland, resumed training until the
industry of England could re-equip them with arms
and ammunition to take the place of what they had
left on the beaches at the evacuation from the
continent. and disastrous
evacuation. Well these people were getting
pretty well trained and pretty well armed. So you
worked with them? So as they flowed out, this big
force magnet moved into the billets that the
English had pulled out of, and bear in mind that the
English was under a threat of invasion in Europe
all summer. So as fast as they could get people with
guns and equipment down there ready to resist that
impending invasion, which was as bogus as a ten
dollar counterfeit. But they didn't know it. They
didn't know it. So you trained for the next 18
months, more than that, in North Ireland and in
England, and you went to, you were in on the
Normandy invasion. That's right. Now tell me
about the Normandy invasion. When did you go
ashore? Well let me give you a connecting link
there. We stayed in North Ireland until New Year's
Eve. of 1943.
And then we moved, our cannon and whatnot were
moved on by railroad to a town in
England
named You went
to this town Devizes? That's in Wiltshire.
And you were ready to stage the operation across
the channel? No. Or you were preparing for it?
It was at this time that you became the commander in
1942 of
the 190th Field Artillery Regiment. That's
right. Which you commanded throughout the rest of
the war. That's right. Now did you, were you
promoted to a Brigadier General? No.
You didn't get promoted overseas? Okay. All your
promotions, if you wanted to be promoted, you
should get a staff job in Washington, D.C.
Tell me about the invasion. Tell me about D-Day.
Well, no, it's too much between. We were in North
Ireland until New Year's Eve. and then we
displaced down to Wiltshire
at Devizes and that put us next door to the British
Army training field and artillery range at
near Salisbury that is mentioned so often in
Kipling's coins. and so on about the British Army.
So, it's all very plain and we did considerable
training in firing and in that area and it was a
wonderful experience because
the first thing that happened to a force magnet was
that when they got one infantry division and one
armored division out of force magnet.
Roosevelt kind of doubled across Winston
Churchill and didn't tell him that he had reduced
the size of magnet from four or five divisions
because the Jap victories and seizures from Burma
across the Pacific had forced him to detach the
32nd Division, which I repeat again was the first
division alerted by General by General Kruger.
The first division, Kruger's order was to turn out
the four or five most ready divisions he had and to
get them over his magnet. Then when the tide turned
against the magnet, Roosevelt without telling me
he was going to do it, just arbitrarily took about
half of the magnet force and diverted it to the
South Pacific. The first thing I knew that there
was trouble in the magnet force was while I was in
Alabama
awaiting the move to the port of embarkation.
While I was there training the 190th
Regiment as a part of the 73rd F.A. Brigade.
While I was there I got a postcard from a professor
that was a major in the 32nd Division and he was
going overseas by train to San Francisco and I
didn't know those divisions and then cut off the
magnet force until a postcard came from him mailed
in Salt Lake City and he was on a troop train headed
for
San Francisco and the South Pacific to join
MacArthur. So, the 32nd Division stripped of its
down to a triangular division was headed for the
South Pacific. And of course, he didn't tell me
where they were going in the South City, except
there was a fellow named Sidney
that had visited our college and made some kind of
long-winded speech. And he was a graduate of our
college and knew a lot of people. So this ex-prof of
mine says, says, the Utah address will surprise
you. Says, I have no idea where we're going, but I
will happily see the
guy that listed us such and such a date. And well,
here's that guy and date and circumstances. was
obviously Sydney. So he says, I expect to see him
there.
It was a disguised breach of regulations. In other
words, he was telling me that they were headed for
Sydney, Australia. So in other words, your force
was much smaller than than Churchill had hoped,
meaning that you had to stay longer in England for
it to build up. Churchill was a disappointed man
when he got that news and we continued over there
training and
so one day a British general, now I teamed up with
the British, I got along happily with them. I had
read most of their novels I was pretty sharp on the
governmental methods. I bought two books at
Rutgers. One of them was Geographical History. It
was an economic geography of the British Isles. It
was by a fellow named He was a professor at London
University named...
So you got, you had read a lot in New York. Well I
bought those two books. I bought that book and
another book on England on British government.
The Duties of the House, The Limitations, and it
was a recent edition. It was strictly a political
science textbook, but it was recent enough to be
quite helpful. So riding on the ship over there,
you've got to do something, you've got to read
something. What did you think of the quality of the
British officer? The quality of the British
officers? They're just like all officers. Some
are good, some are disasters.
So you must have trained with them while your force
was increasing in size. Yeah, we went on tours with
them. I mean maneuvers and we took our guns down
there. I never fired on our guns anywhere on the
British range. that half a dozen of the faculty of
the gunnery school on Salisbury Plain would be
there, and the British, their mouths were
watering for those, what they called, long toms,
and they were dying to get issued. In fact, they
were begging, they said they ought to have at least
eight of these guns for each corps. They thought
that the British corps was somewhat smaller than
the American corps. But to cover the entire front
of the entire corps zone of responsibility, they
needed eight of those guns. and every time I fired
them there'd be a bunch of their officers down, two
or three or four. Now did you have, were you built up
to size by D-Day? By D-Day, yes. While I was, that's
another story. When we moved out of the,
out of the
embarkation area, when we embarked on the Queen
Elizabeth to go across North Ireland,
we had every man in a slot for every skill and every,
he might not have the full skill yet. He hadn't been
with us. But you were a full complement.
Absolutely. The big worry in that transportation
corps, you were in the hands of the transportation
corps at that stage of the game. You weren't in
anybody else's hands and you wrote your own ticket
on what training you could do. And of course I
organized schools
for everybody in the regiment and I kept them busy.
And it's hard to keep a couple of thousand men busy
when their hardware is already on the seas headed
to Europe ahead of them and they're there marking
time for enough ships to come in. It's hard to keep
them busy. Now let's talk about D-Day. Well,
that's a long story by itself.
Did you go in on the second day, D plus one? I was,
that's another story. How much time you got? Well,
I want to find out about your campaigns. You were in
a number of campaigns. And of course D-Day is very
important. You were in five campaigns from D-Day
to Germany.
Well, the
buildup for D-Day was actually more strenuous.
than perhaps D-Day itself in some respects.
There's a little bit more nervous strain on D-Day
immediately thereafter, but as far as the hard
work and everything, there was an awful lot of hard
work done before D-Day and a lot of shuffling
around.
People say, well what were you doing over there?
What were you doing in the war effort? The 1st
Armored Division was transferred out of North
Ireland to Africa. The 34th Division
was transferred out of North Ireland to Africa.
How in the hell did you get stranded up there and
what are you doing now to make the world safe for
democracy? Well, you've got to answer questions
like that. When there's an active campaign in
Africa, what are you doing at all? A British
colonel gave me the tip
as
your command gets more publicity in our papers
than our training does. I says, yes, I notice it.
They come down and take our pictures once in a
while. And I says, what do you think that adds up to?
He says, I don't know, but I thought you might know.
I says, well, I'll meditate on it a little bit. So,
next time I see him, maybe I'll have an answer.
Well, I got the answer, but I never told him. What
the British were doing, they were using us for show
troops to make the Germans think that the fifth,
force magnet was still 100% in the
British Isles. And what they were doing is every
once in a while when we would be training on a new
different, we fired on every range they had in the
British Isles south of Scotland. I don't know if
they got any ranges in Scotland, I don't know where
they were.
We fired on the range there in Salisbury plain. We
fired repeatedly from the range on down
close to Oakhampton. That's the, where,
that's the, you've read the, That Hound of
Baskervilles by A great detective writer. We
fired on that range. So you were prepared by D-Day?
Hell, we were over trained by D-Day. We were, we
fired on the Bodman movers that are famous in all
the novels of
this gal that writes stories about that part of
England.
We
were
lucky in that we got plenty of ammunition to fire,
and what the British were doing
They would take picture of my guns, always with the
men looking in the direction of the muzzle, and
with their backs to the camera, and it would appear
in some or three or four British newspapers.
Recently arrived Yanks, trained with British
Tommies on an undisclosed artillery, So it was
propaganda. Propaganda 100%. In other words, the
Germans knew that every corps had one of these
regiments. So here we were being stooges. Sure.
And the Germans in their map of, in their
distribution of the enemy would immediately
chalk up well Hell, there's another one and
there's another corps. So what we were doing, we
were a part of the facade of what wasn't happening.
The British were quite good at propaganda.
Now what beach did you land at? On Omaha Bay Beach.
We
fired, I found a stock of 75 millimeter ammunition
down there that the British had built up to train
their people to use the French 75s and they took the
French 75s away from our people being trained
that first year we were on active duty. They
stripped some of those guns away from us, brought
them over there. One of my officers discovered
where they were stored. They were stored hub to hub
and hundreds of them that they had pulled together
and he came back and says, if we still had The old gun
says we could be equipped with new tubes and
everything. I said, well I think we can get
equipped with new tubes anyway before we go across
the channel because they aren't going to send a
regiment in combat with 50% worn out tubes and so I
said, By the way, where's the ammunition that goes
with those guns? They haven't shot it up. He says, I
can find out. So I says, find out. He found
something like 50,000 rounds in some damn little
ordnance storeroom over there close to their
artillery range. and I said
make a date with me for me with the supply officer
down there at Salisbury and we got to talk about
that stuff. I said we aren't getting enough firing
through our own tubes. I have to keep 2,000 rounds
of ammunition with me. And I says they won't let me
touch more than just a small percent of that to fire
through the tubes. And their plea is that it wears
the tubes out too soon. And I says we've got to get a
cure for that because we're not really shooting
enough stuff to see whether our surveys and our
preparatory patterns of fire are to be done, and we
can do that with the French 75's if they had them. We
could aim and go through the loading exercise of
the big gun, then the little gun is sitting here on a
parallel setting and it's got a range of 8,000 to
11,000 yards depending upon whether you have the
new boat tail projectile or the new powder. It says
we can get 11,000 yards on that. I says we can go out
there and fire on targets within 11,000 yards with
these short guns instead of wearing out the tubes
on our long guns and we'll just fire once in a while
out of the long gun and stay within the limited
ammunition that way. Well on that ticket,
I went down to the artillery school on Salisbury
Plain and talked to the higher chief there and
asked him what he was going to do with all these
French 75 rounds. He says, melt them down for
automobiles after the war, I presume. I said, well
I can melt down quite a few of them if you'll just
lift the lid on them. He says, oh well, what do you
want with them? I says, I know where I can get 12, I
never fire more than a battalion concentration
and that would mean 12 tubes.
I'll never fire more than that and I says I can set
this and I told him what I wanted. In other words I
wanted to do some what you'd call excalibur
exercises and If you can do a good Excalibur
exercise, you can do a darn sight easier and
quicker. I'd ram it in and shoot itself, but I could
get on any time I could get on a range. I could go out
on my own order, didn't have to ask anybody. Say
I'm, except I would report to my headquarters,
that we were going to fire for so many days on Bodden
and Range, and we'd go out there with all that free
ammunition. We'd load the things up and then we'd
poop them out with great prodigality. We would
fire a
widespread sheaf, a closed sheaf, and you
couldn't lie about whether it was good or bad
because there was the pattern out in front of you.
You could see it through the BC scope looking at the
impacts area, and so we built up quite a reputation
among the British as being an ingenious training
group.
They invited me down to the artillery school one
time to talk to their officers about their faculty
about what they were doing. And they didn't know
it, but we had a $500 survey instrument for each
battalion. One of the finest transits that these
ordinary surveyors around here buy. And The
British didn't call it a transit. They called it a
theodolite.
So, they asked me and my executive officer to come
down. One of the fellows wanted to make a report on
the way we were doing this thing to his colleagues
at the artillery school. And he says, now these
Americans do it this way. And while the guns are
moving into position, the survey squad does this.
The battalion survey squad does that. The
battalion detail that goes up to the observation
post does that.
So, we were supposed to answer all the questions.
Now, this fella had walked through a big chute with
us, and he wanted us to be there to explain anything
he couldn't explain. And when he got through, he
says, are there any questions? And one of the first
questions he got is says,
says, who takes charge? of him placing the guns
while all these officers are out there doing this
survey work here, there, and yonder. Who takes
their place? Who does that? And
the fellow making the speech said, well, I really
don't know. He says, I hadn't thought of that, but
now that you raise it up, There is something about
the Yanks are able to do things that we can't do. He
says, we think that it takes an officer to do all
this survey work. He says, this work in the
American Army is done by sergeants. And you say,
well sergeant, yeah sure. He says, I want to tell
you something.
The knowledge and skills of the American enlisted
men are far superior to that of our people. He says,
our leaving home age is 14.
Grammar school, not high school. says our leaving
school age is 14, their leaving school age is 18.
And where that happens, you can get sergeants that
can run a survey. And so he says, turned to me and he
says, now you vouch for the fact that all these
details were done by a sergeant?" I said, yes,
absolutely.
And I says, don't worry about any deficiency. I
read in the papers that you're going to revise your
entire educational system and put it up to the 16
and 18 level. And I says, when you do, you'll get
sergeants. How'd you get along with the French
people? No kidding?
Why do you say that? Once you got into France, how
were your relations? You just had poor relations
with them in France?
Well,
my second day on D-Day, after D-Day, my second day
after, well,
I got ashore about 10
a.m. with the tide coming in on D plus one. Now at
that time the, our
troops were on the beach holding on like a hair by
the skin of their teeth and the entire Our ship and
the ships around it, patrol boats and whatnot,
were all under artillery fire, but it was the most
incompetent artillery fire I ever saw the Germans
do.
They were obviously firing
on area targets.
without adjustment for wind direction, without
adjustments for
powder temperature, without adjustment for any
of the refining things that you do before you
really poop out a long range missile. That's what a
cannonball is, or a projector. How much Army
experience have you had, pretty much? Three
years. Three years. Which? I was in a Navy gunfire.
Well, you know what I'm talking about when I say
that you don't just ram the damn
projection through the breach, then throw in the
charge, back off and poop it out. You adjust. or at
your fire control center, you adjust for winds,
powder temperature, just every damn little thing
that can affect the flight of that projectile to
its target. So,
the British did very little of that artillery,
ground artillery. They believed we'll see the
burst But
why do you dislike the French? Well,
about D plus three we were already ashore and
shooting. And I had occasion to go back to the beach
to see about the arrival of ammunition, resupply
of ammunition for our particular guns.
And when I got through that gulch that the Corps
headquarters were in, I saw a friend of mine named
Ford, who was the intelligence officer for the 5th
Corps. His name was Ford. I knew Ford quite well,
and I said, Ford,
I just want to ask you one question. He said, what is
it? Then I'll ask you a few.
I said, how many Frenchmen out of these
underground Frenchmen French freedom fighters.
How many of them have come in here and reported
himself as being on our side? And I says the woods
must be full of them around here because this is a
surprise attack and some of these installations
may have been under
their attack. Has anybody shown up out of the
underground or anywhere else and said, give me a
gun, I want to get in on the killing of a few Germans.
And he said, well that's a rather brutal question
to ask. He says, but I can't answer it. He says, yes,
one of them has come in and reported himself for
duty. I says, where is he? He said, he's right over
there. He says, we've got him busy, don't worry.
And he says, he's valuable to us, so don't talk too
damn loud.
He says, there he is. I said, well, which one of
these undergrounds was he? And he says, I don't
know. I haven't talked to him enough. But he says, I
do know one thing. He was the spy that we had on the
job. that was reporting the condition of the
beaches and all that stuff, so he says, he's a
valuable man, don't bother him. And that was the
first, I had a feeling that out of those basements,
Of course all the civilians, French civilians,
went into the deepest basement they could find, or
they knew what to do when they knew they were on the
battlefield. They knew to take to the nearest
forest and
huddle up around any cottage or anything like that
that would offer any shelter Shell fire, anything
like that? So you thought basically the French
were chickens. You're damn right. Now, after
D.D., there was the breakthrough, and the
American armed forces were moving very, very
rapidly all the way into Belgium. And the next
major event was the Battle of the Bulge, in which,
what was your role in the Battle of the Bulge? We
were right on the nose of it. We, our guns were
deployed at